---
title: "Rights and the Budget"
date: 2023-06-29T20:07:18+05:30
draft: false
categories: Law 
---
The rare diseases jurisprudence contradicts the principles of law laid down in the jurisprudence on medical reimbursement. In various cases, the High Courts have held that the right to health guarantee must be implemented in consideration of the state’s resources. Further, this is in accordance with the literature on the framing of the constitution. Even countries with levels of health spending far greater than India do not approach the rare disease problem in this manner. They attempt to solve the problem on the supply side through incentives and support. On the other hand, Indian courts have imposed an unlimited obligation to provide free treatment. 
> The budgetary constraints necessarily mean that litigation before the constitutional courts is the primary manner by which government assistance is to be obtained. In other words, rare diseases jurisprudence is built on the assumption that not all persons with rare diseases will approach the constitutional courts for enforcement of the right to health. If it did not, the court’s order would necessarily mean a directive for a certain allocation of budgetary resources, or an increase in government health spending. This is therefore a policy issue – a utilitarian calculation, not a rights-based analysis. Even South Africa’s constitution, which places far more onerous standards of judicial review of state action and even of state inaction, does not write itself a blank cheque. This is a jurisprudence of sliding scales: the scope of the right to health expands if the number of litigants are low, and shrinks if the number is high. This is a right that can only exist if a tiny subset of a minute minority claims it, and which is untenable at scale. 

In sum, the issue of funding for orphan drugs — while an important issue that deserves coordinated and decisive action –  is a question of utilitarian arithmetic best suited for determination by the legislature and the executive. We acknowledge that persons with rare diseases face a unique burden. But the court’s role here is best performed by flagging issues and demanding accountability for the execution of government policy, not by determining what the policy should be. It is concerning that courts have regularly interfered with the allocative prerogatives of elected governments.

